# Content notes

*these are notes on content that we need to include in the material*

I want to have a slide that has the general formula for a language model. And kind of then discuss where fine-tuning and prompt engineering change this model and what agent capabilities do to this formula. I also want to have a mermaid chart where we kind of see this development. I think there's also some stuff like that that we have. I also want to have a chart that shows how language models are pre-trained and then post-trained. to explain the difference between MCPs and agent skills. I want to explain the difference between coding agents and IDEs with programming or AI capabilities. I want to replicate the graph that Nick showed, so it shows like a 2D space where in a Venn diagram style, then different prompts narrow down the space of solutions. And there he has this example that maybe three iterative prompts give you to a region that a more sophisticated prompt would have let you to. I think we can also expand this figure by seeing how for agents we then have kind of chain reactions almost where agent then calls a certain context to reduce a certain context, and then this resh the solution space.

I also need to introduce the handy voice to text tool and show people how to set it up and that the parakeet is a good language model to use. I also want to give some examples on how much this actually speeds up your workflow, and also I want to make clear that this allows together with language models to really solve some tasks, solve some problems directly, and that this can actually mean that the quality of the work gets a lot gets a lot higher because you're saving work with the actual typing. so you have more space to iterate. and it's also removes friction in the writing process where you just kind of do a brain dump and just talk and talk through problems while recording this, and then afterwards you can have a language model make a first pass, and then you draw out the the the insights and refine your ideas in the writing.

I need to introduce the students to batching and to caching because these are massive savings for many research applications because often we don't rely on live execution, but rather are interested in in the final results and then their batching is actually a very good option. Similarly, I want to show perhaps to the students how to use an open source model on a Slurm or a Snell US cluster, but this should only be more of a brief teaser or brief thing. I want to have some content on privacy secure use of language models. So there we would really need to show Obama together with the smaller language models run on say a MacBook or a small desktop computer that has a GPU. I want to give some so this would be like a work station type setup. I want to give some feeling for how large the quality differences are there and how large the speed differences are. I also want to introduce the students to open router to kind of show that maybe open source and yeah, open solutions are more flexible. Yeah, and this is similar for the open code coding agent rather than locking yourself into cloud code, codex, or cursure directly.

I need to show the students how to use multiple coding agents in parallel and that you can also even build a scheduling system where if there's some leftover usage on your say chat GPT subscription that you can then before the subscription resets you could then have a coding agent make some implementations of backlog programming issues or so. I also need to talk about that the coding agents typically are very aligned for software engineering type tasks, but depending on what you're used to yourself and especially the policies of the journals that you want to submit your work to, it might make sense to write an agents.md file that explains the more e-con style of programming. I think this is a bit unnatural for the agent because it has been assigned sorry, aligned towards software engineering type work. if you really feel the need to have more of this economist style of writing code, and then you need to need to put in some work to make that happen. That being said, I think there are a lot of advantages for getting inspired more by the software engineering way of working, because it's a lot more professional way of writing code, especially with respect to things like unit tests and managing programming environments. there's also a shift in what is an added benefit to a research project, for example. my feeling was that for a while it was really kind of an upgrade or really kind of a bit of a premium thing to have like a companion website for your research project, while now I think this is really this is a very very low hanging fruit. you want to think about how you deal with this. So I think this is something that you want to do for published paper since it's so easy and so cheap to do this. you maybe also don't want to get fooled or get too impressed if you see websites or online companions for research going forward, because all this really means now is that somebody gave instructions to codex and fed in the whole research project and let it mock up a nice website. So this is something that maybe takes an additional hour to have something working on say GitHub pages. so we need to be a bit more aware of of which effort or what what what good what a lot of effort looks like these days.

I need to talk about the plan mode that agents typically have. I also want to talk about how when you have sensitive data, how and you use an agent in your programming, how you might still be able to use the agent for doing bu building like a data processing pipeline or so without sending sensitive data to third party services. So one oI also want to have a section on synthetic respondents, so using language models to actually simulate experiments or simulate how people behave for different stimuli. You can do this in a quantitative way, you can do it in a qualitative way. I want to give an overview of the current literature, what people do, how they set them up, what is known, what is unknown. And then I think the core message from this is that the jury is really still out, and that it can be extremely shaky and misleading, and that especially higher order aspects of data are not present represented accurately. I then also want to point to some actual use cases of language models in say empirical research. So these can be things like testing using them as a first check for your experimental design, creating experimental stimuli. if you do studies online, say on prolific or so, then you want to make sure that you build in attention checks that a state of the art AI agent cannot pass itself. because if this is not the case, then yeah, you have no way of knowing whether the people you actually collect and prolific or Mturk or whatever are actually human responses. So there's some some evidence that actually language models are bleeding into these pools and are not stopped by recent capture methods, because they simply can fill out the capture now. this is another thing. I want to have a separate section on using AI in the ideation process, so coming up with research ideas, vetting these research ideas, doing stuff like understanding the domain with deep research functions. the bottleneck is really not trying out different ideas anymore. because you can run some quick tests in different directions that your research might take you to see whether there's something interesting there or not, by combining language models with with coding agents. This should then also lead into how once you are starting to work on a project, how AI agents can help you in that project. So coding agents cover the whole like data analysis pipeline. we have covered the data collection kind of with the design of service experiments and synthetic data, etc. then something like reviewing literature, so there would be deep research having Zotero as a MCP tool for your agent while still being careful of copyright. So not passing copyrighted articles to a language model that is third party. you also want to be careful with the preprints so that you're not leaking somebody else's work. also want to mention this trick in prompting such that when you do a literature search, that you then tell language models to notify you when they hit a paywall, because otherwise they will just summarise papers based on the abstract rather than the the say open access text or so. I also want to show the archive MCP tool that is you know you can use for directly searching papers on archive for the methodology part of a paper, I want to I want to show how you can maybe discuss method selection with the language model, and maybe think a bit more about how a language model can be used in a more mathematical context. So I don't have experience with that myself yet, but looking at something like lean code. So some of the these programming languages that you can use for mathematical proofs. I think there maybe we can try out if if they can actually support you in in improving theorems or so. that being said, I've heard from econometricians that it already helps them improving stuff when they're working interactively with the language model because the language model simply just knows every theorem out there, and might do some pattern matching that can can be helpful.f the approaches there would be to use a private coding model that you run locally. However, there you often have issues with the infrastructure. Even though there's some smaller coding models that work okay for simple programming tasks. So kind of meta information about your data set. This might be privacy preserving while at the same time giving enough context information to the coding agent such that it can write code. Even better would be to have something like a small mock data set that does not contain information from the actual sensitive data, but that does contain say the same or similar columns and where the values in these cells are say of the same data type and similar properties as the actual sensitive data. so when you have something like that, then you can just let the language model iterate on this mock data set, and yeah, the unit tests or the code that passes there should then also pass on the sensitive data that you then run downstream. of course there you need to be careful that you when you do the final run with your sensitive data set, that you actually just execute like say Python or R yo yourself and don't tell an agent to run it for you. you can of course also introduce rules to the agent that's not allowed to access certain files, so say your your data files or so. if you want to be even more rigorous, you could build something like a Docker container, so like a sandbox where the agent lives and keep your sensitive data files outside of this container, then I think it's the agent is really prohibited from accessing these files at all.


